# ScrumProjectsPlan
I share with you my Excel workbook which allowed me to follow the progress of my daily/weekly tasks on several projects and contacts. I also adapted it to be useful for managing a project using Agile Scrum methodology with several teams, features, stories and tasks. The workbook makes it easy to plan and target current and future sprints (based on one or more weeks). Each workbook encapsulates a release. After a release was delivered, its unfinished stories can be migrated and added to the next release. A snapshot of the previous release is kept in the workbook associated with this release.
The workbook contains macros with available and safe VBA source code.

Welcome to the ScrumProjectsPlan Tool Wiki!

# Introduction:
The SrumProjectsPlan workbook was initially a simple tool for tracking tasks, especially when they have an enormous backlog with disparate tasks.
It intensively uses conditional formatting to highlight tasks according to a well-defined typology.
Subsequently, it evolved to allow a program manager or quality manager to monitor actions on several projects.
Finally the tool opened to another dimension as agile as Scrum (I think :-). It allows managing the iterations or sprints where task / action becomes a Story and where the action type becomes a Module and where the project becomes a Feature.
The Excel workbook encapsulate a Release. Future Releases can be generated by the tool so the unfinished stories will be migrated to the new Release.
The tool also allows snapshots to be taken. These are Excel workbooks with no macro useful for a sharing need.
The workbook can be enriched with graphics other than the one presented by default.

# Protections:
Automatic protection has been added to the workbook (which can be disabled by the user) in order to guarantee:
* The protection of formulas against any alteration by mistake (cell lock)
* Protection from conditional formatting amalgamation. Because after copying cell, the destination cell inherits the conditional formatting of the initial cell. This is not often appreciated by the user (disabling the Copy / Paste function on the cells).

The user can at any time disable this protection if he wishes to adapt the workbook to his own convenience.
**To do this :**
1. Go to the 'Setting' sheet (click on the 'Setting' button at the top left of the 'StoryMapping'
1. Press the 'DISABLE PROTECTION' and / or 'ALLOW COPY / PASTE'
1. Click the 'BACK' button at the top left of the 'Setting' sheet to return to the previous sheet
1. In the Excel 'Revision' menu, remove the protection from the sheet and, if necessary, the one from the workbook
1. This time the protection will not be activated instantly (some time the protection may be restored after you press the other buttons of the workbook like the data migration).

 
# To begin :

**(1)** Clean the workbook to remove the sample data provided by default:

* Click on RESET DATA

**(2)** Change the configuration data according to your project as follows:

+ Click on the [Setting] button at the top left of the 'StoryMapping' sheet.
+ Once in the 'Setting' sheet, make the following changes:

### In 'Setting':

1. **Features**: Enter the list of projects or Features: Be careful the list must not exceed the bold frame. If you need it, insert new lines within this frame.
Only the two columns are used by the tool. The 3rd is just to recall some useful details for planning.
1. **Module**: Adapt the list of 'Type / Module / Sprint / Version'. Same as above, you must respect the limits of the bold frame.
By occasion you can change the color of these cells so that it applies later to your Stories dashboard.
Other colors are available to the right of this list. If you are interested only copy the formatting of it on the 'Type / Module / Sprint / Version' list.
1. **Status**: The statuses can also be changed according to your language. But only modify those within the black frame. Those outside the frame (left) must remain in English.
The formatting of the font of these statuses can also be changed to be subsequently reflected later on the dashboard Stories.
1. **Start / End**: The range of lines for which conditional formatting is to be applied is to be defined in the 2 fields ‘Stories / Tasks begin line’ and ‘Stories / Tasks end line’.
The ‘StoryMapping’ sheet provides an area of 999 stories, but for performance reasons only apply conditional formatting on the lines planned for the project. So start with an acceptable value for the 'Stories / Tasks end line' field. Thereafter you can readjust it if the number of stories exceeds this value.
1. **Priority**: Likewise in the 'Priority' area, respect the limits of the frame and modify the color that suits you. The effect of this color will only be on the 'Priority' cell of the 'StoryMapping' dashboard, not on the wool line.
 
+ Now that you have customized the configuration, you must apply these changes to the 'StoryMapping' dashboard. To do this :
1. Return to the dashboard by clicking on the 'BACK' button at the top left of the 'Setting' sheet.
1. Once in the 'StroyMapping' sheet, click on the 'UPDATE ALL Conditional format....' button and wait for a while (the value of 'Stories / Tasks end line' considerably affects this waiting time).

# Other functionality:
1. [SHOW ALL DATA] button: Allows a single click to disable all applied filters. Useful especially before migrating data to a new version of the tool.
1. [APPEND NEW STORY] button: Allows you to position yourself after the last story to allow the entry of a new one.
1. [COPY AS NEW STORY] button: Adds a new Story copy of the selected Story to the end of the stories list. Just have the cursor on the Story line to copy (not outside!)
1. [SNAPSHOT] button: For people who do not like macro workbooks. This button generates a copy of the workbook without the macros (without the VBA code). The Snapshot is generated in the current directory with a suffix indicating the date and time of generation.
1. [MIGRATE FROM ...] button: Useful if a new version of the tool is available in Github and you want to take advantage of its new features without retyping all Stories, so:

### Warning :

...Use this button on the new version of the tool

Before operating it, make sure that:
* No filter is activated on the old workbook (otherwise only the filtered data will be migrated to the new version)
* It is necessary to close the old workbook concerned by the migration.
Then once you click the button prompts you to choose the old workbook and then the trick is played.
If a dialog informs you that there is a big difference between the two versions, you can always continue. But this case must be checked if data is missing or are in the wrong place.

**6. [GOTO NEXT RELEASE>] button: ** Press this button once the current release is issued and you want to pass the next release. The button generates a new copy of the workbook but removes the finished and canceled Stories.
In this case values in the 'Ref.' column will be generated accordingly so that a Story will have a unique Ref regardless of releases.

# Intercepted events:

The tool performs some operations to keep track of changes on the 'Status' and 'Reviewed Date' key cells:
1. 'Closure or Applied Date' column: The closing date is entered automatically if the Story is closed or canceled. You can change this date later and it will not be affected by the change of status.
1. LOG column: This column shows all changes in the columns 'Status' and 'Date'. If you want to see the entire LOG history, switch the Excel function 'Wrap to line automatically'

# Working with Sprints:

The ‘Current Sprint / Week’ cell indicates the current week or the first week of the current Sprint.
You can thus target this Sprint via a filter on the column 'Target Sprint / Week'

# Working with Stories / Tasks:

Each line represents a Story and its change affects the 'ReleasProgress' sheet. On the other hand the tasks, to carry out the Story, are entered in the column 'Task / Comment' without monitoring their progress.
For my case, I use the following convention for tasks:
* Prefix '-': task defined but not started yet
* The prefix '+': task performed
* The prefix '=>': task In progress

# Modifiable data:
If the protection mode is activated (to be sure check the 'DISABLE PROTECTION' and / or 'ALLOW COPY / PASTE' buttons if are red colored in 'Setting'), the cells to be left unlocked are locked and Excel Does not allow you to modify them. So no worries about this :-)
